knowledge is not enough to lead to
action right it's not enough inspiration
is not enough there has to be a
structure there has to be a system you
have to understand
how to create new behaviors
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory i am here with dr
rangan chatterjee welcome to the show
man
thanks for having me tom thanks so much
dude it is good to have you and right
now i think this is a pretty interesting
time to be talking about your book
which the u.s title anyway is feel good
in five
the reason i think that it's so
interesting is because of
recording this in the middle of a
pandemic certainly gives you a very
clear perspective you break the book
into three parts mind body and heart
you said in the book and i've heard you
say in other interviews that you think
the heart of the mind body and heart
that that one is the most important why
is that
yeah look the third and final section of
the book is about hearts and when i say
heart let me be really clear what i mean
by that so when medical doctors talk
about heart they're typically talking
about the heart as a you know physical
muscle that pumps blood and oxygen
around your body that's certainly what i
was taught in medical school
but heart's got another meaning hasn't
it you know artists poets songwriters
they've been waxing lyrical about this
idea of heart
for many years for thousands of years
and that's i think fundamentally what it
means to be a human being which is to
connect with other people
on a superficial level we feel good when
we're connected to a human being to
another human being when we feel
uh that we're heard or seen you've been
listened to you know you've been
connected with but if we look at hard
science it's also there where we're now
seeing a lot of scientific research
showing that actually
when we feel lonely that feeling of
being lonely may be as harmful as
smoking 15 cigarettes a day people who
feel lonely
die 50 earlier than people who don't 30
more likely to have a heart attack or a
stroke you know these are real
real physical and biological problems
when you're feeling lonely and not
connected now this book came out
in the uk before the pandemic and was
having a huge impact already
but as you said at the top of this
conversation
in many ways it has a heightened
relevance
in lockdown times in pandemic times
where
you know this connection that we would
usually get let's say at the local cafe
at starbucks or whatever when we're just
you know passing by having a chat with a
barista
or at work or in a yoga class or at the
gym those things have been taken away
from us in different countries in
differing amounts i accept that
but it's a big issue
but all i want people to think about is
five minutes
but it's really important to say one of
the five-minute uh heart uh what i call
health snacks is something called a tea
ritual tom and i guess it has a lot of
personal relevance for me and what is
the tea ritual the sea ritual is really
about that idea that
we're so busy these days we're so
distracted often that when we are with
the people we love when we're with the
people that mean the world to us
we're distracted we're not really
together with them we might be in the
same room but we can be lost in our own
worlds of instagram and netflix and
youtube
and so the tea ritual is this idea that
for five minutes a day and typically
because i've got two young children
typically this will be after our kids
have gone to bed my wife and i before we
do anything else
we make a pot of mint tea there's a bit
of ritual around it there's a nice green
pot that we think we bought in
philadelphia the year after we got
married and we sit there and the only
requirement is for five minutes no
phones no laptops we catch up with each
other and ask
um how we've got on right do you have
like a standard opening question to that
you know what we don't and i know some
people like a structure for these things
you know like you know three questions
you may ask we actually don't we have
found
um
that we respond better to a free-form
conversation that where it's simply a
case of hey babe how was your day today
and then she starts and one of the jobs
i have to do is to try and listen
attentively not into her not give her my
opinion on her day which i
used to be very good at doing but
actually
you know actually listen to what she has
to say uh and again if we want to dive
into relationships it's kind of like
i've had to learn through this process
that
she doesn't want me to fix her problems
she wants me to hear them
does that drive you crazy at all
i was going to say that was a long pause
there wrong i was going to say it used
to but i think if i'm being honest it
drives me less crazy than it used to you
know we've been married i think what 12
13 years now
it probably is only in the last year or
two that i finally got the message hey
she doesn't want me to fix it she wants
me to listen now sometimes i i go back
into old habits and i try and offer a
solution
it is difficult for me but this is what
i think is is important about being an
attentive listener and being switched on
to the needs whether it's a partner or a
friend or a work colleague it's really
trying to understand what they need
yeah it's interesting this is obviously
one of the most sort of cliche
differences between men and women is
that just wanting to express wanting to
have your feelings heard and what's
interesting is so i went through the
same thing with my wife and we finally
just had to have a rule where it was
like because there were times where she
actually did want me to help her solve a
problem and so i would like sketch out
between which of these moments is this
and so in conversations now we just say
look are you just asking me to listen
which goes to
one of the most powerful parts of your
book which is this notion of habits
and so in the book you talk about
aligning a new behavior that you want
with like a an already existing habit
what's the power of that and how do you
actually make that work with something
like
trying to deepen the connection of your
relationship
yes so
any behavior
any behavior needs a trigger
right so
you talking to me now we had an
appointment there would have been some
trigger it could have been your memory
it could have been a notification on
your phone it could have been your pa
phoning you it would have required a
trigger of some sort now when it comes
to triggers that's kind of three broad
times right one is your memory right so
your memory works like it could be oh i
heard that podcast meditation is really
important so you go the next day you
think yeah i heard that on impact theory
i need to meditate
oh you're waiting for your memory to
remind you now that may work if you
remember every day you may end up
meditating but it's very unreliable so
the next best form of trigger is some
kind of notification it could be
notification on your phone it could be a
post-it note on your refrigerator or on
your laptop reminding you to do
something that is better than memory but
it's not as good as the final type of
trigger which is when you stick on that
new behavior onto an existing habit
because that habit by definition means
you're already doing it without thinking
about it i'll give you an example
that i do so i
don't go to the gym i've not been to the
gym probably for about two years but i
stay fit
right i do a workout every morning so
what happens in the morning i do a
couple of things as part of my routine
but the second thing i do
is i make coffee
right so in the kitchen i'll weigh out
the coffee beans i'll pour it into the
french press and the timer goes on for
four to five minutes
during that time i don't go on instagram
i don't go on email i don't make phone
calls
i do a workout in the kitchen in my
pajamas right i've stuck it on to that
behavior so every morning i'm gonna have
coffee so every morning i work out i
don't need to find time in my day to do
it i'm not saying that's going to work
for anyone else but it works for me and
that's what people have to do they have
to find what are those existing habits
in their life that they can stick on new
behaviors too
so
if we apply that to something like a tea
ritual
okay so i know that my wife and i we
know that our relationship is better
when we commit to that tea ritual every
day and actually in during covert in the
first few weeks of lockdown we actually
stopped doing it our whole patterning
had gone our rhythm had gone and we
noticed a subsequent decline in the
intimacy and the quality of our
relationship so again i wouldn't call
that failure i call that education it's
not you know every time you stop doing
something and you're in tune with the
impact it's like ah you know what when
we do those five minutes a day actually
our relationship is much better we feel
closer we feel connected and why is five
minutes important right
the five minutes it's not a gimmick
right but the five minutes is the
commitment we make to each other so why
five minutes are so powerful is that
it's small enough that even the busiest
person
feels that i can fit that into my day
it's only five minutes but it's long
enough that it's gonna have an impact
right so it sounds
too easy too simple so on some days
we're still chatting 40 minutes later
some days it's 5 minutes some days it's
a real quick check-in hey babe how was
your day yeah you know what i'm busy it
was okay i'm a bit stressed out i do
actually have some emails to get done
tonight i'd love to
um but i'm feeling really stressed and
then i'll say hey cool
you know what i'm feeling good at the
moment i get it that that's on your mind
so at the end of five minutes it's like
yeah she goes off and does her emails so
it's it's not that it has to be five
minutes a day but the minimum
requirements you know almost like
minimum effective dose is five minutes
because if we said tom we've got to do
it for half an hour every evening
which is what a lot of people do with
their health habits they're trying to
introduce i've got to meditate for half
an hour a day i've got to work out for
half an hour 45 minutes a day what
happens then is that on that busy day
where you don't have time that becomes
an obstacle that becomes a reason why
you won't do it so the five minutes
means we always do it
because we know there's no pressure to
go beyond the five minutes does that
answer your question yeah it does and i
think that it's worth but i want to get
back to the tea ritual itself but the um
it's worth putting a really fine point
so the whole thesis of the book
using your language you want to set the
bar low
which not a lot of people are saying
that myself included so you want to set
the bar low to make sure that people do
it but there tends to be sort of this
knock-on effect
why
is why is that so important that that's
the title of the book it's the core
thesis of the book and honestly if i
were to shove you as a thinker into one
box um the box i would put you in is
simplicity
why is simplicity so powerful
simplicity is everything right it is it
is the essence of actually
being able to communicate with people
getting people to do the things that you
are hopefully inspiring them empowering
them to do
there's so much knowledge out there in
the world there's podcasts there's
social media there's you know people
don't have a lack of information about
how to improve their lives right
that it's it's everywhere but why do so
many people struggle knowledge is not
enough to lead to action right it's not
enough inspiration is not enough there
has to be a structure there has to be a
system you have to understand
how to create new behaviors and so the
challenge i set myself was
how simple can you make this right
let's say in my first two books if i had
an idea to work out maybe it would take
11 or 12 pages to work up that idea in
this book i challenge myself can you do
the same thing in two pages what is the
absolute essence of what you're trying
to say
and i've been practicing as an md now
tom for almost 20 years right and i have
seen
by and large what works and what doesn't
work now of course i know that some
people can make overnight change they
can completely transform their lives but
typically
there has to be a big pain point there
has to have been
uh really bad health issues you know bad
depression bad anxiety uh chronic pain
low energy all that has to be in some
sort of significant life issue a
bereavement a divorce losing their job
right sure people can often turn their
lives around overnight when something
that big happens
but for the rest of us who don't have
that big pain point what i see over and
over again is people trying to make
change they think motivation is going to
be enough the motivation carries them
through for one week for two weeks for
three weeks then when the motivation
goes down health plan goes down as well
um you know 42 year old chap i saw in my
in my practice a few years ago maybe six
or seven years ago right this is a
classic case which probably illustrates
this
42-year old chap a little bit overweight
a little bit of a low mood and
struggling with energy
okay
come to see me we have a chat it's very
clear to me that his lifestyle by and
large is contributing to the way that
he's feeling so we went through a number
of options and the one that lit his eyes
up that he was like yeah i want it was
was strength training he said dark yes
strength training what strength is gonna
help my mood it's gonna help me lose
weight it's gonna help my physique i
used to do as a teenager i've not done
any years i want to do it i said okay
great
he says to me
so watch what i do doc 40 minutes three
times a week i said yeah that'd be
amazing can you manage that because yeah
yeah no problem
he walks out of my surgery door big
smile on his face he's got motivation he
knows what he's gonna do right and i
make an appointment
to follow up with me four weeks later
four weeks later he comes in
his shoulder slumped over he looks a bit
sheepish i say hey look how you getting
on how was the gym what's that you know
what how are you finding it you know
what he said to me
he said dr you know what
i've hardly been um work's been really
busy
i'm stressed out at work the gym's quite
far it's not really on my commute i
don't always have time and energy to get
there
i've not really done much right he feels
like a failure i i didn't think why has
he not done what i've asked him to do
i thought rongan you have clearly not
given him advice that he feels is
relevant to him
in the context of his life
so i took my jacket off and i said hey
look right i'm going to teach you right
now a five minute body weight workout
are you in he goes yeah sure so i told
him five exercises i modified them for
his ability level and i said do you
think you can manage that he goes yeah
that's fine easy i said i want you to do
this for five minutes twice a week at
home and he laughed at me he said
what 10 minutes a week is that it i said
yeah can you do that because yeah of
course i said okay that's all i wanted
to do
do 10 minutes a week i'll see you in
four weeks okay so he goes out four
weeks later tom he walks in body
language completely different this time
he walks in
chest is puffed out he's got a smile on
his face i said how are you doing
he said doc you said just to do five
minutes twice a week but i found it so
easy it made me feel good i started
doing it for 10 minutes every evening
before i had dinner
right so what's that now the now the
guy's doing 70 minutes of strength
training a week when he couldn't do 40
minutes three times a week he's now
doing 70 minutes a week and then what
happens
right there's a ripple effect that i've
written about it knocks on into other
aspects of his life right he was doing
that for at least five years right some
days it would be 10 minutes some days it
will be 20 minutes but it was consistent
and then now he gets them in the morning
he does uh breathing and meditation for
five ten minutes he goes for a one-hour
walk every lunch time he eats better he
sleeps better so for him
it all started with that change and i
have seen that over and over again and
this is what the research backs up tom
let's let's go to business for a second
tom right business
amazon understand behavior change so the
rumors are that five years ago also when
they moved to one click ordering
estimates say that their profits went up
by 300 million dollars a year
so why is that well in the past what did
you have to do you have to
um
you know you have to click on your on
your basket go to the next screen
confirm go to the next screen put in
your card details you know there's three
or four steps you have to take
before you place your order every time
you take a step that's a reason to
procrastinate that's a reason to back
out of actually doing the behavior
amazon have figured out if they make it
easy so that before you blinked you've
got something arriving the next day
people do the behavior youtube netflix
do the same thing why does one
video go into the next video it's so
before you've realized it's midnight
i'm tired i should go to bed i have work
tomorrow morning the next episode has
started right so these companies and i
i'm not criticizing these companies they
understand behavior change
so they implement it so that you buy
more or you spend more time on their
platform i'm saying when it comes to
health why do we think we can ignore
those rules why do we think health has
to be about deprivation and about
punishments why can't we apply those
same rules and go oh if it's easy i do
it so all the five minute workouts in my
book don't require equipment they don't
require you to join a gym they don't
require you to get changed and i i
honestly think tom this is one of the
problems these days you can go and read
a million health blogs a million
different health podcasts and you can
think you know
yoga is great meditation is great
strength training is great keto's great
um
breath works great this is what it's
like oh my god it's overwhelming do i
spend my whole day just doing one after
the other if i want to optimize my
well-being so what i try to do is i try
to flip and go how simple can you make
this
and i think that's one of the reasons
this book has been the most successful
book i've written so far
is i think because
i have made it simple so people can
actually do the behaviors
all right so let's say that people buy
into that notion let's get into the
weeds so give us a thumbnail sketch of
somebody who's doing a great job they're
keeping it simple so they're not doing
everything in the book you talk about
you know pick one of the
health snacks from each of those items
and do that but give us a couple
examples from each of the three pillars
so people understand exactly um you know
what they should do
sure so there's about maybe 40 or 50
different five-minute recommendations in
the book all you need to do is choose
three one from the mind section one from
the body section one from the heart
section okay so the mind do
and do it every day so i say when you're
starting choose one and do the same one
every day at the same time so like
people get it when you talk about tooth
brushing right so
we we don't think with our you know our
dental health example we don't think hey
you know what
i'm not going to worry about it in the
week but you know on a sunday i'm going
to give it a big one hour deep clean in
my teeth we don't do that right but we
sort of think we can do that with other
aspects of our health physical mental
and emotional health and i'm saying no
the reason four minutes a day on your
dental health
looks after your teeth over time is
because
it becomes a habit and it's a small
thing done regularly that adds up we
just don't think about good habits in
the same way as bad habits so tom
framework is mind body hearts mind is
mental health body is moving your body
for your physical health and heart is
the whole connection piece so in mind
there are five minute breath exercises
you know breathing exercises so one is
a zen practice called breath counting
that i was doing this for a good few
months and i really found it
not only helped me
feel less stressed but it helped my
focus and concentration in the day and
it's really simple you just sit down you
shut your eyes
you breathe in
on the out breath you count one in your
heads breathe in again on the out breath
you count two and you do that up to five
when you get to five you just start to
get it one and go to five now here's the
thing tom once i did it
i ended up at 30 before i'd even
realized that my mind had wandered so
what it does it trains concentration
attention and focus so that's one uh
there's also journaling exercises so i
really feel that journaling is one of
the most powerful things we can do
especially first thing in the morning
often we've got
anxieties and worries whirring round our
brains
and we do nothing to process them so
that then impacts the interactions we
have in the day it impacts how stressed
we feel it impacts the decisions we make
but five minutes of journaling first
thing in the morning and how do people
journal like what what do they do stream
of consciousness make a list
well i give people two options i one is
a free form one where i say literally
write down anything that comes into your
mind anything for five minutes just
write anything even if it feels like
complete garbage unrelated thoughts this
is not a
book manuscript this is not a letter to
your boss
this is just you're trying to clear out
the junk in your brain now
it's really interesting i've done this
with patients but when the book came out
in the uk in january
i got so many messages on instagram a
few weeks later from people saying
wrong and it's really interesting i
didn't realize i was anxious about
things but when i started to do this
four or five things each day started to
come out in my writings that i was
really worried about so this is how good
we are as humans about burying
um into our subconscious you know things
we're worried about one option for
journaling and i've called it
downloading in the book it's like a it's
like a brain dump the morning download
is free form the other option is an
exercise i've created called the five
step release
this is brilliant for people who've got
anxiety and you literally have these
five questions to answer and it frankly
it takes two or three minutes it doesn't
even take five minutes
you answer these five questions
what is one thing i'm worried about
today
okay so you write that down what's one
thing i can do to prepare about it
number three what's one reason it won't
be as bad it probably won't be as bad as
i think it's gonna be
four what's one reason i know i can
probably handle it
and five what's one upside of the
situation
simple exercise very easy to do but very
effective
this and i guarantee that for the vast
majority of people
they will feel better they will feel
less anxious less stressed because
it's these small things done
consistently that add up so i've given
you a breath work example in mind i've
given you a couple of journaling
examples in mind
um you know there's five minutes of flow
so i know you've spoken about flow state
on many of your shows before um flow
state is an incredible state where you
know we're doing something that's
challenging enough to keep us interested
but it's not so challenging that we
switch off it's when time sort of stands
still and that could be anything it
could be playing your piano guitar it
could be playing chess it could be doing
a puzzle
uh 42 year old lady i saw
migraines
she's got three kids husband's got a
busy job i felt stress was driving her
migraines a lot and she said i don't
have time for this stuff she tried yoga
she tried meditation
says doc i'm busy i don't have time for
this stuff it turns out she loved
coloring books super easy to do
if you do it's like all these things
they're great if you actually go and do
it so she was struggling right so i said
to her what'd you do in the morning
she said i have a cup of tea you know
the kids are causing mayhem and chaos
but i will go and make a cup of tea i
said perfect
that is
a habit that we can stick this onto i
said do you need a notification in your
phone to remind you to have a cup of tea
she said of course not no i have a
morning cup of tea i said okay perfect
so what i want you to do before you go
to bed
in the evening i want you to make sure
you've got a coloring book
and your crayons next to your kettle
and it sounds so simple it sounds like
we are children but you know what when
you make something easy to do people do
it so she comes down
she puts on the kettle she sees her
coloring book on the crayons that if
something is missing if the coloring
book is upstairs if her kids have taken
the crayons in another room
she may not do the behavior it's like oh
i need to go upstairs i need to get that
i'll forget i haven't got time today no
she started doing it
within about a week her migraines had
gone down by about 50 percent she was
still getting them they were just a lot
better
three to four weeks later she was hardly
guessing them apart from on stress on
really stressful days
now it doesn't always happen that easily
and that quickly tom but i used that
example because it was so powerful
again people may be skeptical listening
five minutes what difference will it
really make well that lady sort out her
migraines the patient i told you about
at the start
that helped him lose weight improve his
mood get more energy these five-minute
interventions do work because if five
minutes didn't work then why are we
wasting our time brushing our teeth to
four minutes a day right yeah
of how people can buy into it with bad
habits like oh if i smash myself in the
hand with a hammer for five minutes i
know that it would be problematic
this is you know one of my core theses
is that people don't recognize they're
having a biological experience and so
getting a coloring book and doing
something that is essentially meditative
right you're finding a way where you're
totally absorbed in something and thusly
your mind can't allocate resources to
worrying about a problem the thoughts
that you think are obviously going to
color your emotions no pun intended and
so if your mind is worrying to use your
word around these negative thoughts then
your emotions are going to be negative
but if on the other hand you're coloring
you slide into neutral and so if you're
in a mental situation where you're never
clicking into neutral and you're always
worrying around these negative ideas
you're you're never actually getting out
of those negative emotions and it can be
very simple a coloring book watching a
comedy um forcing yourself to laugh out
loud i mean whatever that thing is but
doing something that shifts what
zone your brain is in can be
extraordinarily powerful um so yeah that
makes a lot of sense to me and look you
do we made it simple now why again
simplicity is important because
otherwise tom people go okay i get it
right i need to get into that zone
they may then make the next leap which
is i need to learn meditation i need to
sign up for this class i need to do one
hour a day
i'm not saying those things can't work
right of course they can work
but more often than not
that is the obstacle which means they do
it for two weeks
then they stop when life gets in the way
and that's because a couple of things
motivation right motivation doesn't last
we think it lasts but it doesn't right
there's something called the motivation
wave and behavioral change science now
bj fought professor bj from stanford he
coined it the motivation wave so
motivation goes up motivation goes down
most of us
make our health plans or our new year's
resolutions
at the peak of the motivation way we go
yeah this is going to be my year i'm
going to lose weight i'm going to
meditate
and you know what for the first two
weeks in january or the first two weeks
of september after the summer they are
in but then you know what life gets in
the way they're busy they're stressed
out oh man i don't have time to go
spinning four times a week i don't have
time to meditate for half an hour a day
so they go from everything to zero
whereas if you understand that
motivation goes up when it comes down
the clever thing to do is to you make
your plan
for the trough for the lowest point and
the most facial wave you you plan for
low motivation and that's why you got to
make things easy because if you make
things easy
even when your motivation is down you
will still do it so when i say as you
sort of said at the start set the bar
low it's not that i only want people to
do five minutes right and i'm not being
deceptive either i'm saying if you set
the bar low and you do it consistently
you know what
some days you will just do five minutes
some days you'll do 20 minutes somebody
should do half an hour but five minutes
is your base because then each day
you're ticking it off so i think
motivation is worth understanding but
then something i thought would be really
worth exploring with utah and i wonder
what you think about this i think
strongly
if we think if we're thinking about
values if we think about our identity
what my book does what this plan does
whoever you are right
is this helps you shape your identity
through action you start changing your
identity so if you remember that 42 year
old chap i mentioned at the start
he initially had the identity of someone
who can't look after himself i can't
stick to a health plan they're all too
difficult but when i made it easy for
him and he does it he starts to feel
good i helped him feel successful i
helped him feel good and so his identity
starts to change he starts to now become
not someone who fails every health plan
he's someone
who's a success
and you know i've been thinking about
this idea recently that
often the identity we have is an
identity that we wish to have right and
our actions on a daily basis are not
consistent with that so that in that gap
there's friction in our lives there's
this kind of constant friction whereby
our actions are not matching up to this
identity that we perceive ourselves to
have and what i'm trying to do with this
book is to help people align those
things together so that they can show
themselves every single day
i am someone who prioritizes myself ah
my relationship is worth it my health is
worth it and another way to do this and
this is another part of behavior change
is you've got to celebrate
each success right we often don't take
time for this so we get it with bad
habits so the example i often use is if
you feel low and you feel down and you
buy a chocolate bar
often you will feel good for a few
minutes or maybe 10 or 15 minutes you'll
feel good right
so you've wired in this idea of a very
powerful emotional response which is i
feel low i eat chocolate i feel good
that is very very powerful
and actually it's not repetition that
creates habits it's emotions that
creates habits so
you really want after a positive about
let's say you've done a five minute
workout let's say it's five minutes of
skipping or five minutes of dancing you
want to almost luxuriate in that feeling
of well-being
how how how do you do that well okay so
bj will say you should say something
like i am awesome out loud now out loud
he says say it feel it absorb it i am
awesome but he gets up every day and he
says today is gonna be a great day and
he says it and absorbs that would make
me feel like a total doofus i would
never do that
right as a brit
there is no way in hell that people in
england are gonna say i am awesome after
doing a workout we're too reserved for
that right so there are many ways you
can do it
a simple uh kind of very non-tech way to
do this have a tick chart right tip
charts work
so i have a chart like i am literally
what
10 yards from my kitchen in there next
to the fridge
i my wife and my two children we have
our own charts with our mind snack our
body snack and our heart snack and every
day once we've done them we tick them
because it feels good we tick them and
have a little smile to ourselves right
so even if my day has been bad or my
week has been bad i can look at the
fridge and i go i can see
21 times this week
i have prioritized myself and done
something proactive my mental physical
and emotional well-being
this works right tick charts work
it works beautifully well for children a
lot of
parents contact me say oh this is great
but can i do this with my children you
can
you allow them to pick i didn't
prescribe which one to do why didn't say
you've got to do this one hey look pick
the ones that you want to do
and then you're going to do them right
so
it sounds i love that but i i'm i we we
still have two more to go here and i
don't want to run out of time so um we
got mine we rocked that we know how to
celebrate it i'm with it um now we're
we want to go body our heart next
okay let's go body right body we all
know i i you know movement is important
working out our body super important but
why does so many of us struggle to do
that
like the patient i mentioned he couldn't
get to the gym you've got to make it
easy so there are
i don't know how many maybe 10 different
five-minute workouts there's strength
workouts there's interval workouts
there's skipping workouts there's
yoga flows there's whatever you want but
as i say all of them
you don't need to buy equipment
you don't need to join a gym you don't
need to get changed talk to me about the
classic five
the classic five is one of my favorite
ones right it is i think it's the five
most
high impact body weight exercises that
you can do and that's the key right body
weight look you can easily bring in
things that require equipment but i
discipline myself to say wrong no
equipment a lab because equipment means
it's an excuse for somebody not to do it
oh i don't have it i'm not gonna do it
it's simple right it's a press up um
it's uh
squats you know it's lunges
it's reverse flies which you can do with
your arms and the glute bridge you know
the bridge when you're lying and you
sort of lift up your hips lying on your
back
you're lying on your back with your sort
of feet on the floor with your knees at
a slight angle yep and your arms flat on
the ground and you lift up
uh your your bum and your hips while
contracting your glutes so again it's
just trying to give people a balanced
workouts so that's one there are
interval workouts if people want
something super simple there's one in
there that i call simple sweat you pick
a whole body exercise that you like
let's say
um jumping jacks or whole body exercise
put a timer on for 30 seconds do jumping
jacks for 30 seconds rest repeat five
times you've just done yourself an
interval workout right it is simple you
do that every day you will feel a
difference you will see changes in your
physique you will feel better with your
mood
and again
i'm not here to
uh tell people not to join gems or not
to work out more than that sure do more
i often do more but this is the base
framework i may go for a run these days
i may go for a long walk i may do some
pull-ups when i'm on my walk in the in
the kids play park i may stop and do
pull-ups and dips on the gym there right
i may do that but i still don't that's
not a replacement for this this becomes
a part of my day so even if i do that
i'm still doing my five minute body
weight in the morning
you know so now heart part i think is
going to be the most troubling for
people given the sort of remote nature
of things
um
what what so we talked about the tea
ceremony taking five minutes to
reconnect what are some things that
people can do if they're living alone
how can they um tap into the hard stuff
yeah so connection um it's really
interesting a connection
is not always to another human being
connection can also be connection to
yourself professor john capiocho who i
think he unfortunately died last year he
is probably the guy who's researched the
most on loneliness so what is lowness
right is
is human connection about being with
somebody else physically no because you
could be in the middle of times square
and surrounded by you know thousands of
people back in the day when you could do
that
and still feel lonely
connection is about a shared experience
so ironically tom
in this current pandemic we're at a time
where in many ways
we've got a leg up in terms of
connecting people because we're all in
some way sharing a similar experience of
the lives that we've lost of the grief
that we may be going through for what
we're now missing out on so you can
connect let's say you're living by
yourself
it is not the same as human connection i
know on our last conversation i spoke
about human touch and how important that
is and that is something many people are
being starved off at the moment with
dire consequences but you could call a
friend each day right you could um
you know call a friend and go hey how
was your day today you know lockdown is
really bothering me now three months i
was okay but now into the fourth and
fifth month i find it really hard if
your friend goes yeah me too i'm really
struggling that is connection right you
don't have to physically be with someone
to connect
is it the same probably not but it can
go a long way so that is one thing i
tell people to do one thing i was doing
in lockdown a lot was
in a whatsapp group uh between my
friends by my really good college
friends we would get together at the
same time every day for 10 minutes we'd
say okay at 8 30 we're all jumping on
and for those 10 minutes we'd all just
banter around we'd have a laugh with
each other
you know what it feels good it feels
really really good
and
one of the one of the recommendations of
the book is send a random text of
kindness each day so you literally go
through your contact list pick someone
at random and send them a coin says hey
you know what i was thinking of you
today i remember when you helped me move
my sofa 10 years ago just wanted to say
thank you
kindness is contagious
kindness helps to reduce stress levels
makes you happier makes you feel better
there's some studies showing kindness
can even help reduce aging right it's
absolutely amazing so
being kind to another person doing
something for another individual
connects you to that person it connects
you to something greater than yourself
which again i think is a really
important part of well-being so
you know there are so many options what
i'm asking people to do is just choose
one of those heart interventions
um you know i do the tea ritual the
other one i do is a gratitude game that
i don't know if i spoke to you about
before or not but it's something that's
part of our family life which is
because of lockdown i am at home every
evening so my wife me and my two kids we
have dinner together every single
evening and as part of dinner
we go round the table this is a game
that charles poliquin actually taught me
many years ago uh the strength coach
uh you asked three questions what have i
done today to make somebody else happy
what has somebody else done today to
make me happy and what have i learned
today
and i tell you it's one of the most
powerful things we do it connects us we
hear things about each other that we
wouldn't hear about if we had
superficial level uh conversation and
this reminds me of that first question
about the t ritual tom you know my wife
and i we don't have a structure when we
do our tea ritual but you know what this
grassroot game is a beautiful structure
these three questions
but some people like to free form it as
well so
yeah so i'm just i i just know
because i've seen it for 20 years that
this sort of plan works i've seen it
since the book came out but of course
i would just ask people to trust it
listen to what they've heard in this
conversation
pick one thing if three habits a day is
too much you know what fine start with
one
start with one
you know i kind of like this idea of a
keystone habit like
what is that one keystone habit that
when you do it
keeps everything else going online
and for me it's very much my morning
routine on the days that i do my morning
routine if i start with breath work and
meditation
you know what it knocks on to everything
else i do that day but on those days
where i miss it
i notice that it's just not quite the
same uh i'm not as productive i'm not as
calm i'm not as grounded
so really the book is and this approach
is about how do you take action and how
do you really change your identity as
well as your health
through
taking these small steps each day
dude that that is the perfect place to
wrap it up man uh i hope that people
dive in and use the book which as you
said is all that really matters so make
sure you use it where can people find
you find the book all that good stuff
well look the book is available all over
the place you know amazon in your
bookstores you can you can pick up feel
better in five there
i have a weekly podcast called feel
better live more people want to hear
more about this kind of stuff
you know audio and on youtube our best
social media platform is probably
instagram at dr chatterjee that's
d-r-c-h-a-t-t-e-r-j-e
love it alright guys if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential